[New Term] Java ArrayList: `.indexOf()` (#1454)
Codecademy/docs: content/java/concepts/array-list/terms/indexOf/indexOf.md

---
Title: '.indexOf()'
Description: 'Returns the index of the first occurrence of a given element, or -1 if not found.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Arrays'
  - 'Data Types'
  - 'Elements'
  - 'Search'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

The **`.indexOf()`** method returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified element in an `ArrayList`. If the element is not found, -1 is returned.

## Syntax

```pseudo
myArrayList.indexOf(element);
```

The index of its first occurrence is returned if the `element` exists, even if the value is `null`. If the `element` can't be found, -1 will be returned.

## Example

> The following example features two calls to `.indexOf()` on an `ArrayList` called `animals`. The first call will print the index of the first occurrence of the element with the string `"Tiger"`. The second will return -1 because an element with the string `"Elephant"` does not exist:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example features two calls to `.indexOf()` on an `ArrayList` called `animals`. The first call will print the index of the first occurrence of the element  `"Tiger"`. The second will return -1 because the element `"Elephant"` does not exist:
```

```java
// Import the ArrayList class from the java.util package
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Create ArrayList of type String named animals

>     ArrayList<String> animals = new ArrayList<String>();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ArrayList<String> animals = new ArrayList<>();
```

    animals.add("Lion");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    animals.add("Cat");
    animals.add("Dog");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    animals.add("Lion");
    animals.add("Tiger");

    System.out.println(animals.indexOf("Tiger"));
    System.out.println(animals.indexOf("Elephant"));
  }
}
```

This will print the following output:

```shell
1
-1
```

The `.indexOf()` method does not work with primitive data types.

```java
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class HelloWorld {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Hello, World!");
    ArrayList<int> list = new ArrayList<>();
    list.add(1);
    list.add(2);
    list.add(3);

    int index = list.indexOf(2);
    System.out.println("ArrayList: " + list);
    System.out.println("Index with value of 2: " + index);
  }
}
```

Since `.indexOf()` method does not work with primitive data types. the following error will be thrown:

```shell
javac /tmp/CmHIzfwn03/HelloWorld.java
/tmp/CmHIzfwn03/HelloWorld.java:7: error: unexpected type
ArrayList<int> list = new ArrayList<>();
                  ^
  required: reference
  found:    int
1 error
```

> Wrapper classes (e.g., `Integer`) must be used in order for the `.indexOf()` method to work with primitive values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wrapper classes (e.g., `Integer`) must be used for the `.indexOf()` method to work with primitive values:
```

Author: ok

## Syntax

```pseudo
myArrayList.indexOf(element);
```

The index of its first occurrence (even if the value if `null`) is returned if the `element` exists. If the `element` can't be found, -1 will be returned.

## Example

The following example features two calls to `.indexOf()` on `animals`. The first will print the index of the first occurrence of the element with the string `"Tiger"`. The second will return -1 because `"Elephant"` does not exist in `animals`:

```java
// Import the ArrayList class from the java.util package
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Create ArrayList of type String named animals
    ArrayList<String> animals = new ArrayList<String>();
    animals.add("Lion");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    animals.add("Cat");
    animals.add("Dog");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    animals.add("Lion");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    System.out.println(animals.indexOf("Tiger"));
    System.out.println(animals.indexOf("Elephant"));

  }
}
```

This will print the following output:

```shell
1
-1
```

The `.indexOf()` method does not work with primitive data types.

## Example 2

```java
public class Main {

>   public static void main(String[] args) {
> //    array
>     int[] arr = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
>     // check if a element is peresent in a array
>     // returns errror as arrays dont have indexOf() method
>     System.out.println(arr.indexOf(3));
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    int[] arr = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};

    System.out.println(arr.indexOf(3));
```

  }
}
```

> ```shell

Reviewer 2: Could we add the following text between lines # 75 and # 76?

Since arrays do not have an `.indexOf()` method, the following error will be thrown:

Author: ya added

Author: @Dusch4593  if we add these lines in there we have to keep  this example 2 one as it is can you look into that? i am confused on whether to remove example 2 or not 

imo its better to remove as now i added another 2 examples on why arraylist.indexof method dont accept int but does integer 

look into that and let me know 

thankyou
https://github.com/Codecademy/docs/pull/1454/files#r1062497759

Author: that link refers to line where you said its better to remove example 2

error: cannot find symbol
    System.out.println(arr.indexOf(3));
                      ^
  symbol:   method indexOf(int)
  location: variable arr of type int[]
1 error
```

> To use the `.indexOf()` method with primitive data types, you need to use the wrapper classes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Wrapper classes must be used in order for the `.indexOf()` method to work with primitive values.
```

For Docs entries, let's refrain from using "you", "your", and "you're" and aim for a more neutral, manual-like voice.

Author: ok

---
Title: '.indexOf()'
Description: 'Returns the index of the first occurrence of a given element, or -1 if not found.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Arrays'
  - 'Data Types'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> The **`.indexOf()`** method returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified element in an `ArrayList`. If no element is found, -1 is returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **`.indexOf()`** method returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified element in an `ArrayList`. If the element is not found, -1 is returned.
```

## Syntax

```pseudo
myArrayList.indexOf(element);
```

> If the `element` exists in `myArrayList`, the `.indexOf()` method will return the index of its first occurrence (even if the value if `null`). If the `element` can't be found, -1 will be returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The index of its first occurrence (even if the value if `null`) is returned if the `element` exists. If the `element` can't be found, -1 will be returned.
```

```java
// Import the ArrayList class from the java.util package
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Create ArrayList of type String named animals
    ArrayList<String> animals = new ArrayList<String>();
    // Add elements to ArrayList refer .add() docs for more info
    animals.add("Lion");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    animals.add("Cat");
    animals.add("Dog");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    animals.add("Lion");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    // Print the index of the first occurrence of the element "Tiger" in this case 1
    System.out.println(animals.indexOf("Tiger"));
    System.out.println(animals.indexOf("Elephant"));

  }
}
```

This will print the following output:

```shell
1
-1
```

The `.indexOf()` method does not work with primitive data types.

## Example 2

```java
public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
//    array
    int[] arr = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
    // check if a element is peresent in a array
    // returns errror as arrays dont have indexOf() method
    System.out.println(arr.indexOf(3));

  }
}
```

> 
> ## Output for above code
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> The `.indexOf()` method does not work with primitive data types.
> 
> ## Example 2
> 
> ```java
> public class Main {
>   public static void main(String[] args) {
> //    array
>     int[] arr = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
>     // check if a element is peresent in a array
>     // returns errror as arrays dont have indexOf() method
>     System.out.println(arr.indexOf(3));
> 
>   }
> }
> ```
> 
> ## Output for above code
> 
> ```shell
> error: cannot find symbol
>     System.out.println(arr.indexOf(3));
>                       ^
>   symbol:   method indexOf(int)
>   location: variable arr of type int[]
> 1 error
> ```
> 
> To use the `.indexOf()` method with primitive data types, you need to use the wrapper classes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I don't think it's necessary to explicitly say this is not a regular array method and show the error the will occur.

---
Title: '.indexOf()'

> Description: 'If ArrayList contains given element returns the index of the first occurrence of it , else -1'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Description: 'Returns the index of the first occurrence of a given element, or -1 if not found.'
```

Reviewer 2: Since this is a term entry, the `Description` should begin with a present-tense verb.

Author: ok

Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Arrays'

>   - 'Data Types'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - 'Data Types'
  - 'Elements'
  - 'Search'
```

Author: oki

CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> The **`.indexOf()`** method returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified element in [`ArrayList`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/array-list), or -1 if it does not contain the element

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **`.indexOf()`** method returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified element in an `ArrayList`. If no element is found, -1 is returned.
```

Reviewer 2: Since this term is already under `ArrayList`, there is no need to link to the parent concept entry. 😄

Author: ya makes sense

## Syntax

```pseudo

> arrayListInstance.indexOf(element);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
myArrayList.indexOf(element);
```

```

> Signature of the method is `indexOf(Object element)` where `element` is the element whose lowest index is to be returned.
> 
> it does not throw any exception if the element is not present in the [`ArrayList`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/array-list) but returns -1.
> 
> but `.equals()` method may throw a NullPointerException if the element is null.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `element` exists in `myArrayList`, the `.indexOf()` method will return the index of its first occurrence (even if the value if `null`). If the `element` can't be found, -1 will be returned.
```

> but `.equals()` method may throw a NullPointerException if the element is null.

This doesn't seem to bear out for this method. After troubleshooting, not only can you add `null` to an `ArrayList` object, the `.indexOf()` will return the index of that `null` value as expect.

Author: i will recheck and update

## Example

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The following example features two calls to `.indexOf()` on `animals`. The first will print the index of the first occurrence of the element with the string `"Tiger"`. The second will return -1 because `"Elephant"` does not exist in `animals`:

```

```java
// Import the ArrayList class from the java.util package
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Create ArrayList of type String named animals
    ArrayList<String> animals = new ArrayList<String>();

>     // Add elements to ArrayList refer .add() docs for more info

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

    animals.add("Lion");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    animals.add("Cat");
    animals.add("Dog");
    animals.add("Tiger");
    animals.add("Lion");
    animals.add("Tiger");

>     // Print the index of the first occurrence of the element "Tiger" in this case 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

>     System.out.println(animals.indexOf("Tiger\n"));

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    System.out.println(animals.indexOf("Tiger"));
```

With the `\n`, the result would be -1.

    System.out.println(animals.indexOf("Elephant"));

  }
}
```

> The code above will print the index of the first occurrence of the element `"Tiger"` in the [`ArrayList`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/array-list) which is `1`.
> 
> ## Output

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will print the following output:
```

```shell
1
-1
```

> The `.indexOf()` method does not work with primitive data types.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I agree with this point. Isn't it more so that `.indexOf()` is not compatible with _regular arrays_ because it is an `ArrayList` method?

Author: ```
// Online Java Compiler
// Use this editor to write, compile and run your Java code online
import java.util.ArrayList;
class HelloWorld {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, World!");
        ArrayList<int> list = new ArrayList<>();  
        list.add(1);
        list.add(2);
        list.add(3);

int index = list.indexOf(2);  
System.out.println(index);

        
    }
}
```
##Output wud be err
```
javac /tmp/CmHIzfwn03/HelloWorld.java
/tmp/CmHIzfwn03/HelloWorld.java:7: error: unexpected type
ArrayList<int> list = new ArrayList<>();  
                  ^
  required: reference
  found:    int
1 error

```

Author: ```
// Online Java Compiler
// Use this editor to write, compile and run your Java code online
import java.util.ArrayList;
class HelloWorld {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, World!");
        ArrayList<Integer> list = new ArrayList<>();  
        list.add(1);
        list.add(2);
        list.add(3);

int index = list.indexOf(2);  
System.out.println(index);

        
    }
}
```
##output normal as we r using integer
```
java -cp /tmp/CmHIzfwn03 HelloWorld
Hello, World!1
```

Author: Integer is an object whereas int is primitive data type
below pic is from official java docs
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/92514129/210931561-61e1b5b7-484f-422a-abc0-976729fe52a5.png)
as you can see what .indexOf supports is object not a primitive data type as mentioned in docs...

> ## Example 2

Reviewer 2: Based on my comment directly above this, I'm not sure we even need this second example.

Author: ok ig updating code will do? like to make it show we cant use int in arraylist and use .indexof ?

Author: haa my bad i used array.indexOf tht was a mistake as array dont have that method i misinterpreted docs it should indexof method dont accept primitives
